\*\* DRAFT\*\*

**Sound and Vision:**

**The Alchemical Epistemology of Michael Maier\'s *Atalanta fugiens*
(1618)**

**Tara Nummedal**

*Atalanta fugiens* proposes at least two ways of reading its contents.
\[Figure 1: *Atalanta* title page\] First and foremost, Maier's title
page offers up a story. The engravings tell the tale of Atalanta,
Hippomenes, and a trio of apples, while the title itself, *Atalanta
fleeing*, puts Atalanta in motion, thereby inviting the reader to follow
her flight to the final pages of the book. Even as the title page
(literally) frames Maier's masterpiece with a straightforward visual
narrative, however, it immediately suggests a very different mode of
reading as well. "Adapted partly for the eyes and intellect...partly for
the ears and the soul's recreation," Maier's title continues, the "New
Emblems on the Secrets of Nature" within were to be "seen, read,
reflected upon, comprehended, weighed, sung, and heard."[^1] With this
subtitle, then, Maier underscores the fact that *Atalanta fugiens* is
also a collection of emblems, a genre that demands of its reader not
flight and forward motion, but pause, lingering, and stillness.
Moreover, the emblematic mode of reading demands multiple senses, not
just the intellect or eyes, but also the voice and ears. In the preface
that follows, Maier pointed to the potential rewards of reading in these
complicated ways, expressing his wish that, "men of letters prize and
value these figures, which serve thus to the intellect and to several
senses, so that great things are to be hoped for from them, both as to
utility and as to delight."[^2]

We might think of these two modes of reading as horizontal and vertical.
The horizontal mode encourages the reader to turn the page, reading the
emblems sequentially in search of a narrative thread across multiple
emblems, while the vertical mode asks the reader to linger on a single
emblem in order to explore connections among its parts. This essay will
explore these two approaches to reading *Atalanta fugiens*, arguing that
their juxtaposition transforms *Atalanta fugiens* into a flexible
instrument for generating new knowledge about chymistry. It is
significant, however, that both modes of reading require the reader to
activate multiple senses -- not only the intellect, but also the eye and
ear. This, I argue, makes *Atalanta fugiens* into a commentary on the
place of reading and writing -- and their relationship to other bodily
ways of knowing - in the production of chymical knowledge.[^3] *Atalanta
fugiens* cultivated particular habits of mind and body, making a serious
point that chymical truths were divine truths, and that the chymist must
deploy the intellect and the senses to uncover chymical secrets. In
showing his readers how to read *Atalanta fugiens*, in other words,
Maier taught them how to practice chymistry, and ultimately to feed both
the intellect and the soul with new truths about nature's chymical
arcana.

**How to read *Atalanta fugiens***

Maier was in fact quite explicit about how he thought aspiring
chymists[^4] should read his book. His title page and epigram point
towards the most straightforward horizontal way to approach the book,
which is to follow the story of the race, the consummation of Atalanta
and Hippomenes' love and, finally, their ultimate transformation into
lions.[^5] The book first sets out this theme in the images on the title
page. We see the Garden of the Hesperides (guarded by a many-headed
dragon, Ladon), Venus, Cybele's temple, Atalanta and Hippomenes (both
during their race and after their transformation into lions), all of
which outline the tale to follow. Turning the page, however, the reader
finds not images but words: Maier's verse epigram, which expands the
visual cues on the title page to alert the reader to his basic chymical
interpretation. Atalanta represents philosophical mercury and Hippomenes
philosophical sulfur, Maier explains, the two elemental qualities of
matter that the alchemist must combine in order to produce the
philosophers' stone. By linking Atalanta and Hippomenes' union and
transformation into lions to the alchemist's production of the
philosophers' stone, Maier suggests that a skillful chymical
interpretation of the lovers' tale might reveal how to make this most
precious of alchemical desiderata.

Proceeding to the emblems themselves, the reader finally comes to the
third element of the book: the music. It, too, initially seems to
reinforce Maier's suggestion that the emblems will divulge alchemical
secrets via the tale of Atalanta and Hippomones. Turning the page to
Emblem I and scanning left to right, the reader's eye first falls upon
the music and the marginal labels for the three voices: "Atalanta, or
voice fleeing," "Hippomenes, or voice following," and "the apple thrown,
or voice delaying." By now, these characters would be familiar, and by
placing his melodies in their mouths, Maier seems to suggests that the
interplay of the three voices, together with image and text, will drive
*Atalanta fugiens* forward and fulfill the promise of Maier's title page
to unfold the alchemical meaning of the story of Atalanta and
Hippomenes.

*Atalanta fugiens* immediately complicates this proposal, however, for
it turns out that the story of Atalanta and Hippomenes does not, in
fact, carry through the emblems. It is tempting to imagine, for example,
that the order of voices in the canons would mirror Ovid's plot, so that
Atalanta's voice would begin the canon when she is in the lead, the
apple part would begin when Hippomenes tosses them in front of Atalanta,
and, eventually, Hippomones would begin the canons as he surges ahead to
take the lead. This is not the structure of the canons, however. Rather,
the apple is nearly always the lead voice, followed by Atalanta, then
Hippomenes, foiling any neat correlation between the order of the voices
and the shifting lead in the race. Nor do Atalanta, Hippomenes, and the
Apple sing about their contest and its fallout; rather, their lyrics,
which come from the related epigrams, are about chymical epistemology,
processes, and materials. Finally, while the images in the emblems are
full of classicized figures and landscapes, Atalanta, Hippomones, and
the goddesses who shape their narrative never appear after the title
page. In short, the conceit of *Atalanta fugiens* and Maier's initial
frame for his chymical treatise falls away almost immediately, leaving
the reader without the promised narrative thread to follow through the
fifty emblems.

Maier's bait and switch is productive, however, causing the reader to
stumble for a moment, to pause and consider how to proceed without
Atalanta as the promised guide. Fortunately, the experienced reader
could recover her footing quickly by drawing on experience with the two
genres that informed the structure of *Atalanta fugiens*: emblems and
illustrated alchemical texts. The emblem book was the most obvious model
for reading *Atalanta fugiens,* given the fact that Maier refers to his
book as "New Emblems on the Secrets of Nature." The fashionable print
genre of the emblem book emerged out of older traditions such as the
Greek epigram, hieroglyphics, *imprese*, florilegia, medals, and
heraldry and exploded in the wake of Andrea Alciato's 1531 *Emblematum
liber*.[^6] \[Figure: link to an image from Alciato if it is not cost
prohibitive\] In general, collections of emblems were not meant to be
read vertically, that is one at a time and top to bottom, rather than
sequentially, one emblem after the next. **\[link to Alexandra's 101
here\]** Typically, emblems used the motto-*pictura*-epigram format to
convey truths about anything from love to politics and then to impress
those insights upon the reader's memory. The relationships among the
three parts were often enigmatic, spurring the reader to reflection,
creativity, and play, and making even a single emblem a perfect game in
learned circles by providing fodder for erudite displays of
virtuosity.[^7] Maier's readers may also have been accustomed to
thinking about alchemy, in particular, with both words and images,
particularly in the German-speaking lands, where the alchemical
illustrated poem, or *Bildgedicht*, emerged. This late medieval
tradition is epitomized by the *Rosarium philosophorum*, which wove
together quotes from older alchemical texts with a series of twenty
images (themselves "quotes" from earlier manuscripts), and found its way
into print with Part II of *De Alchemia Opuscula complura veterum
philosophorum\...* (Frankfurt, 1550). \[Figure: Rosarium, if not cost
prohibitive\] The sequence of images in the *Rosarium philosophorum*
suggested a horizontal reading, as they followed the union, death, and
resurrection, and transformation of Sol and Luna into the philosophers'
stone. *Atalanta fugiens* was hardly *sui generis*, in other words, but
rather rested on two well-established traditions, the humanist emblem
and illustrated alchemical texts, both of which would have prepared
readers/viewers for the kinds of vertical and horizontal reading that
Maier's emblems demanded.[^8]

Readers of *Atalanta fugiens* who were new to chymistry and mostly
familiar with emblem books (rather alchemical *Bildgedichte*) likely
would have approached any given emblem vertically. That is to say, they
would have begun by reading the motto at the top, probably in Latin, but
perhaps also (or instead) with a glance to the left to read it in
German. Next, their eyes would have fallen on the image or *pictura*,
which reinforced the message of the motto, and then, finally, on the
epigram and discourses below, which expanded on the motto's meaning.
Emblem 11 offers a good example of how this works \[Figure 4: Emblem 11:
first 2 pages.\] The Latin motto, "Make Latona White and Rip Up the
Books," is repeated in the *pictura*, where we see a woman seated in the
center, being washed on the left by another classical figure. At her
feet she has two children, one of whom has the head of a sun, and the
other a moon on her head. On the right, a third classical figure is
ripping up books. The *pictura* divides neatly into two halves, right
under the ampersand of the motto, closely linking the bifurcated image
to the motto above. \[could add an illustration showing this\]

The Latin epigram below the *picture* gives more detail, but the learned
reader would have understood Maier's classical reference immediately.
Latona is the mother of Apollo and Diana (gods of sun and moon),
represented as the twins at her feet. The beginning of the epigram
confirms this: "There is no one who does not know the twin offspring of
Latona,/ Who were sired by Jove, as the old story goes."[^9] A reader
familiar with the alchemical corpus, moreover, would have recognized
Maier's clever word play as well. The motto, "Make Latona White, and Rip
up the Books," cites a well-known alchemical injunction warning against
confusing or misleading books: "Make Laton white and rip up the books,
that your hearts may not be destroyed."[^10] Laton (or latten) is a
yellow alloy of gold and silver that some alchemists believed must be
purified further to produce the philosophers' stone.[^11] Maier makes a
slight adjustment, however, changing "Laton" into "Latona," which gives
him the opportunity to put a classicizing spin on chymical materials.
"Some say that the face of this offspring, the light of the sun, mixed
with the moon, has black spots," he continues; in other words, Latona
can produce sun and moon, or gold and silver, but she is impure, flecked
with dark spots on her face.[^12] "Therefore," Maier concludes, "see to
it that you whiten Latona/ condemn and rip up the books, which are
giving ambiguity/ and let there not be delay."[^13] The text and image
on the right side of Emblem 11, then, may be read as a proposal for
action, an injunction to set books aside and manipulate matter in the
laboratory (in this case, whitening and purifying an impure alloy as a
step towards producing the philosophers' stone and, ultimately, gold and
silver).

This kind of emblematic vertical reading guided readers down through the
parts of any given emblem in *Atalanta fugiens*, leading them deeper
into its chymical secrets. Maier's inclusion of music, however, made
even this kind of vertical reading more complex. What if a European
reader, accustomed to reading left to right, began with the German motto
on the upper left, his eye then scrolling down through the music to the
German epigram before moving across to the Latin version on the right
that replaced the music with an image? What made *Atalanta fugiens*
unique among emblem books and alchemical *Bildgedichte*, after all, was
Maier's inclusion of music, so it seems fitting that a reader might have
begun there, and not with the more familiar motto, image, and epigram on
the right. Starting on the left, the reader would find the familiar
canon format, with the Apple leading, then Atalanta, followed by
Hippomenes. Their voices and melodies are framed above and below with
German verse, but they sing in Latin, and this encourages the reader's
eye to wander down and to the right to the Latin epigram that provided
the lyrics. Moreover, Atalanta, Hippomones, and the Apple sing about
chymistry, namely Laton(a) and the value of laboratory praxis over
confusing books. If we remember that Maier's readers would have
encountered fifty emblems in *Atalanta fugiens*, then this repeated
slippage in the music from Ovid's tale into the laboratory becomes
something of its own *cantus firmus*, a steady and recurrent reminder
that Maier's book is really about chymistry, despite its literary
trappings.

Let us imagine a different kind of reader, however: someone familiar
with alchemical texts or *Bildgedichte* such as the *Rosarium
philosophorum,* and thus expecting the emblems in *Atalanta fugiens* to
outline a series of steps, perhaps for producing the philosophers'
stone. By Maier's day, moreover, even the emblem genre had begun to move
in this direction, evolving from its original form as a collection of
discreet and self-contained individual emblems, into more coherent
thematic collections. \[cite example?\] This imaginary reader may have
been inclined to dwell less on text and image in a single emblem, but
rather to horizontally instead, locating connections across multiple
emblems. This possibility is in fact what made *Atalanta fugiens*
especially promising. By framing his collection of emblems with the
narrative of Atalanta and Hippomenes, telling his readers that the
lovers tale should be understood as a method for making the
philosophers' stone, and then reminding them of this connection again
and again at the outset of each of the fifty fugues, Maier suggested
that there *was* a narrative linking his emblems after all. Certainly,
Atalanta and Hippomenes disappeared after the opening pages, but perhaps
the emblems told a tale of chymical processes instead, a step by step
series of instructions for making the philosophers' stone.

Maier's readers, in short, may have approached *Atalanta fugiens* with
different kinds of expertise and expectations, and this would have
produced different kinds of readings and different kinds of lessons. If
we envision that our reader has just finished reading and pondering
Emblem 11, for example, where might he go from there? Perhaps he would
simply flip the page to follow Atalanta and Hippomones into Emblem 12,
reading the emblems sequentially. He also might have decided to obey
Maier's exhortation to set aside confusing books entirely for the
laboratory, putting down *Atalanta fugiens* and stoking a fire instead.
On the other hand, this reader may well have chosen to remain within
*Atalanta fugiens*, at least for the moment; that is, instead of
proceeding from Emblem 11 to Emblem 12 (thus proceeding "in order"), he
might have jumped from Emblem 11 into other parts of the book. He might
have returned back to the title page, for example, where the many-headed
dragon Ladon sits in the Garden of the Hesperides guarding the golden
apples, to ponder yet another dimension of Maier's play on Laton/Latona.
\[Figure 1: title page of *Atalanta*\] Or, this same reader might have
flipped ahead in the book instead from Emblem 11 to Emblem 25 \[Figure
5: Emblem 25/XXV\], "The Dragon does not die, if it is not killed by its
brother and sister, i.e. Sol and Luna." In this emblem, we see Latona's
twins Sol and Luna again, now all grown up, and attempting to bludgeon a
dragon who, we are told, "does not die if it is not killed by its
brother and sister, i.e. Sol and Luna." This dragon's tail recalls
Ladon's on the title page, but Maier's epigram tells us that the dragon
here represents philosophical mercury, which can only be coagulated with
Sol and Luna. Maier is again pointing to the laboratory, but one wonders
how this step is related to the one in Emblem 11 before, or, for that
matter, any of the others in between? Perhaps there is a chymical
narrative threaded through the book after all, if one only knew how to
find it?

My point here is not to answer these questions, to "figure out" the
secrets that Maier embedded in his complex book. Clearly, there was no
single way to read *Atalanta fugiens,* which drew on both the genre of
the emblem book and the alchemical *Bildgedicht* (not to mention the
feint that it was about Atalanta and Hippomenes) to shape readers'
expectations. In fact, the open-ended nature of *Atalanta fugiens* and
the infinite number of links, layers, and hidden meanings embedded in it
deliberately resists any possibility of "solving" the puzzle (although
it is fun to try). Rather, my point is that, despite its claim to be the
story of Atalanta and Hippomenes, the structure and content of *Atalanta
fugiens* encourages its readers to read both vertically and
horizontally, that is, not only to linger within a single emblem to
consider internal connections among its visual, textual, and musical
parts, but also to read across multiple emblems. Moreover, even this
latter kind of horizontal reading offered numerous possibilities. One
need not read sequentially (although one could), but could also skip
around, flip back and forth, and construct groupings out of emblems
otherwise dispersed throughout the book. In short, reading *Atalanta
fugiens* for connections and juxtapositions across and within emblems
turns the book into a tool, an instrument for multiplying meanings and
endlessly generating new insights into nature, and possibly even
producing valuable chymical materials in the laboratory.

**2. Embodied Reading **

The multiple parts of *Atalanta fugiens* and the complicated
relationships among them were not the only things that made reading
Maier's book difficult. Readers had to engage multiple parts of their
own bodies and minds as well. After all, as Maier admonished, the book
was to be "seen, read, reflected upon, comprehended, weighed, sung, and
heard."[^14] One needed eyes for the first two activities in this list,
although Maier differentiated between seeing (pictures) and reading
(words). He lists three different kinds of mental activity as well,
noting that the book is to be reflected upon, comprehended, weighed
(*meditanda, intelligenda, dijudicanda*). These were different facets of
intellectual work: taking in information, determining its meaning, and
then weighing its significance with respect to other texts, images, or
ideas. Finally, in order to grapple with *Atalanta fugiens*, one must
use the mouth (or a musical instrument) to produce sound, and the ear to
consume it. As Maier put it:

> In order to have as it were in a single view and embrace these three
> objects of the more spiritual senses, namely of sight, hearing and the
> intellect itself, and so as to introduce to the soul that which is to
> be understood at one and the same time, we have joined Optics to Music
> and the sense to the intellect, that is, rarities for the sight and
> hearing with the chemical emblems that are proper to this
> science.[^15]

Maier's book deliberately engaged the intellect *and* the senses, in
other words, and he challenged his readers to attempt to grasp chymical
arcana with all of them at once. (The three lower perceptual faculties
of touch, smell, and taste, are notably and deliberately absent from
Maier's sensorium, although as we know, plenty of people who examined
and experimented with nature in early modern Europe used these senses as
well.)[^16]

So why choose emblems as the best format for conveying chymical
knowledge? In part, this was about Maier's deep investment in chymistry
as a privileged and difficult endeavor. In invoking the "chemical
emblems that are proper to this science," Maier endorsed a particular
mode of communication as fitting for chymistry. Other "arts," he noted,
might communicate more directly "because they want to be, and should be,
understood by all. Chemia is not thus, but like a chaste virgin behind a
lattice, and like Diana, is not to be seen without a veil of various
colors."[^17] Readers who were well read in alchemical literature would
have nodded in agreement, given many (although by no means all)
alchemical authors' propensity towards allegory, poetry, and rhetorical
techniques of "dispersion" (spreading dicta over a text) and *Decknamen*
(code names for alchemical materials).[^18] For Maier, this was as it
should be. Chymistry was not simply an artisanal practice, but was meant
to challenge the intellect, he explained, and this is why he chose to
present it in *Atalanta fugiens* as a collection of images, allegories,
secrets, and "musical rarities." The reader, listener, or viewer of
*Atalanta fugiens* would not discover the secrets within easily -- he or
she must ponder them and perhaps discuss them with others -- but the
intellectual exercise would bring rewards in the end.

Moreover, Maier confesses, representing chymistry as multimedia emblem
might have an additional benefit. It made chymistry more appealing, more
likely to catch and hold readers' attention, and thus eventually to
penetrate the intellect. One must approach the intellect gently, he
explained, and with the proper protocol: "it is necessary for everything
knowable to be brought and made known to the intellect, as to a
magistrate or arbitrator, first by the senses as investigators and
messengers, like the guardians who watch at the gates (their organs) of
some city."[^19] Then, if chymical knowledge "is first entrusted to the
sense, there is no doubt that it should be transferred from the sense to
the intellect, as through a portal..."[^20] The sensory pleasures of
*Atalanta fugiens*, in other words, could draw readers in, and then open
the intellect to the deeper truths within. As the author's epigram to
*Atalanta fugiens* concluded, "These emblems are offered to your ears
and eyes, but reason will seek out the arcana embedded in these marks
\[*notas*\]. I bring them to your senses, that your intellect may grasp
what treasures lie hidden within."[^21] For all of these reasons, in
Maier's view, emblems were the perfect format for promoting and
containing chymical knowledge. As a fashionable genre, emblems set as
the social context that Maier aspired to for chymistry, making it a
learned and entertaining subject. Emblems also allowed for a suitably
enigmatic presentation of chymical arcana, thus allowing Maier to print
chymical secrets without divulging them to all. Furthermore, enhanced
with sound and image, emblems could draw people in to a subject that
they otherwise might have avoided. The multiple advantages of emblems,
therefore, addressed some of Maier's concerns about chymistry's public
image, its social status, intellectual cache, and presence in European
print culture.[^22]

I would like to suggest that the emblem format did something else as
well, however. It focused Maier's audience on an issue that was central
not only to reading *Atalanta fugiens*, but to the search for knowledge
more generally as well, namely how to strike the right balance between
intellectual and sensory engagements with nature. In other words,
learning to read about chymical arcana in emblems was also a way to
calibrate the mind and body and ultimately, to cultivate the skills
required to practice chymistry.

**3. Chymical Practice**

In order to press his case about the proper balance between intellectual
and sensory engagements with chymical arcana, Maier drew on late
Renaissance understandings of philosophical psychology and
cognition.[^23] Done properly, in his view, seeking "chymicall secrets"
was one of the most dignified undertakings, second only to the pursuit
of the divine. Drawing on a conventional Aristotelian hierarchy of the
vegetative, sensitive, and intellective souls, Maier began the preface
to *Atalanta fugiens* by explaining, "Man, gentle reader, is by general
consent held to be in his composition a compendium of the universe, and
to be destined to live a life of the triple kind," vegetable, sensible,
and intelligible. In the "maternal womb," he lives a "vegetable life,"
growing "not much differently from a plant." In "this world," he lives a
"sensible life," mostly guided by his senses, distinguished from animals
only "in that be begins to use his senses, albeit imperfectly." Finally,
"in the other world which is God's," he lives "the intelligible life"
alongside the angels. *Atalanta fugiens* addressed the middle field,
that is, the "sensible life," where humans can make use of both the
"intellect" and the "corporeal senses." Using the intellect, he says,
"those more learned men, devoted to the refined arts and sciences" may
approach the divine and pursue "subtle, wondrous, and rare things." On
the other hand, "those more numerous men given to bodily pleasures,
lust, gluttony, external pomp, and suchlike things" limit themselves to
the use of the senses, and thus to the "genus of beasts."[^24]

Naturally, Maier envisioned himself and his readers to be among those
"more learned men, devoted to the refined arts and sciences," and he
offered *Atalanta fugiens* as an instrument with which to pursue these
aims. "To cultivate the intellect," he explained, "God concealed
infinite *arcana* in nature, which are found out by innumerable arts and
sciences, as fire out of a flint, and transferred to use."[^25] The
interest in arcana was widespread among scholars and printers in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and Maier wanted to make it clear
that chymistry, too, had secrets to offer.[^26] In his view, however,
true chymical arcana were not mere recipes or techniques, the arcana
peddled by what he called "those wandering deceivers and pseudo-chemical
frauds (who in these matters are like the ass with the lyre, as alien as
can be from all good doctrine and intention)."[^27] True chymical
arcana, in Maier's view, were not for sale, but were rather a divine
gift to help humans develop their higher faculties. In fact, chymical
arcana were the best secrets for this task. "The secrets of chymistry
are not last among these \[secrets that God concealed in Nature\]," he
proclaimed, but the first and most precious after the searching out of
divine things."[^28]

In Maier's hierarchy of cognitive engagements with the world, he clearly
privileged the intellect. As Maier explained in his preface to *Atalanta
fugiens*, true chymical secrets are "to be grasped by the intellect
sooner than by sense, by profound contemplation upon the reading of
authors, and comparing them together and with the works of nature,
rather than by sensitive operation, or manual experimentation, which is
blind without previous theory."[^29] Maier certainly did not call for a
purely "intellectual" practice of alchemy, even as he does call for a
methodical reading practice that includes "profound contemplation" of
books. His claim, rather, is that the search for chymical secrets cannot
succeed with the senses alone. Maier juxtaposed two different approaches
to chymical knowledge. One method is to combine textual and laboratory
practices, reading, reflecting upon, and comparing texts within the
alchemical corpus and placing insights from books into conversation with
"the works of nature." For Maier, this careful reading and toggling
between books and direct sensory engagement with nature was preferable
to the other method, namely eschewing books in favor of "sensitive
operation, or manual experimentation" alone, which he saw as "blind"
because it lacked a theoretical framework.

Maier expanded on this idea in the emblem we have already examined,
Emblem 11, "Make Latona White and Rip Up the Books." \[Figure 4: Emblem
11\] There he acknowledged some of the limitations of approaching
chymistry through books alone. By 1600 or so, the corpus of chymical
texts was overwhelming and confusing. Not only was there a growing
number of ancient, medieval, and now early modern texts, but reading
them was difficult because of inconsistent terminology and sometimes
riddling prose style. "The variety of writings of the authors is so
great, that searchers after truth would despair of reaching the ultimate
aim of the art," Maier noted in the discourse to Emblem 11. "The
allegorical stories in themselves are already difficult to understand
and are the cause of many errors," he continued, "still the more so when
the same expressions are used for different things, and different
expressions for the same things." All of this made it difficult to
locate "the truth hidden under so many obscurities" and to "sift what is
truth and what is not." And so, Maier advised, quoting an injunction
that appeared in other alchemical texts as well, "the books should be
ripped apart, so that hearts may not be destroyed." In other words, as
the motto to Emblem 11 proclaims, the aspiring alchemist should "rip up
the books," and dispense with misleading or confusing \[*ambiguous*\]
books that only cause anguish.[^30]

Maier's advice in this emblem is a bit dramatic, to be sure (and
certainly he did not intend for his readers to tear *Atalanta fugiens*
apart!). His point is not that alchemical texts will always mislead and
thus should be set aside entirely, but rather that they can be
difficult, and, more importantly, that the laboratory can help the
chymist navigate the library. "A clear intellect is not sufficient
without manual labor, nor manual labor without a clear mind," he states
directly; "theory is not sufficient without practice and vice versa."
The key to chymical clarity is balance, following Nature and gaining
"experientia" on the one hand, and careful, deliberative reading
\[*studio et lectio authorum*\] on the other. Each frames questions and
clarifies the findings of the other, whether in books or in nature
itself. And, as I have already suggested, the other elements of Emblem
11 underscore the importance of the laboratory by pointing the reader to
practice (in this case, whitening and purifying an impure alloy as a
step towards producing the philosophers' stone and, ultimately, gold and
silver.)[^31]

Maier returned to these themes again in Emblem 42, echoing and
developing his argument that the true *chymist* must be guided by the
interplay of theory and practice. \[Figure6 : Emblem 42\] Emblem 42 is
one of Maier's more repetitive emblems, with image, text, and music all
reiterating the point first made in the motto: "Nature, reason,
experience and reading must be guide, staff, spectacles, and lamp to him
that is employed in chymical affairs."[^32] The image reinforces the
motto by depicting the chymist, a bearded man equipped with staff,
spectacles, and a lamp, following in the footsteps of Nature
personified. As the accompanying discourse elaborates, the chymist is
like a traveler. He needs "First, a competent guide guarding him against
errors; secondly a solid stick, which prevents him from slipping on the
slippery road; thirdly good eyesight, and fourthly a lamp or a burning
torch so that he may distinguish the partings of the ways...namely,
*Natura, Ratio, Experientia*, and *Lectio*."[^33] Natura, in other
words, provides not only the raw materials necessary for the chymist's
art, but also exemplars of how these materials behave. Ratio, the staff,
prevents the Chymist from stumbling, helping him sort out true from
untrue, and Experientia, the spectacles, assist him in observing and
thus building up a store of knowledge. Finally, Lectio, reading, is the
lamp, "without which there would be only darkness and dense fogs."[^34]
Maier not only underscores the importance of choosing good books, but
takes the opportunity to address proper reading practices. One must read
books repeatedly and patiently, he argues, for quick, superficial
reading will only lead to failure and confusion. Likening these four
elements of the Chymist's practice to a vehicle that allows the chymist
to travel the path of Philosophical Medicine, Maier emphasizes that all
must be present in order to make progress; "if one of the wheels is
missing, the other three are no longer of any use."[^35] The music in
this emblem reinforces this message as well. Emblem 42 is one of the few
emblems that departs from the standard order: Apple, then Atalanta, then
Hippomenes. Rather, in this fugue, for the first time, two of the voices
(Atalanta and the Apple) sing in unison, momentarily suspending the
canon format of the book. \[Audio 1: Fugue 42\] Moreover, all three
voices sing in even quarter notes, suggesting that they are now
proceeding in lock step. Hippomenes, in other words, is apace with
Atalanta and her apple, just as the chymist steps right in the footsteps
of Nature.[^36]

Armed with both spectacles and a lamp, the chymist in Emblem 42 draws
particular attention to the sense of sight. Historians are not
accustomed to thinking of alchemists as individuals with particular
visual expertise. We associate the trained eye much more closely with
the naturalist combing the landscape for specimens of plants, for
example, or with the physician, whose ability to differentiate among
numerous shades of yellow was central to the practice of uroscopy.[^37]
Yet alchemists, too, relied heavily on sight in their practice,
scrutinizing color changes, the rise and fall of vapors, and the
qualities and location of solid matter in their retorts as purveyors of
crucial information about the progress of the transformations they hoped
to effect, as well as signs of how and when to intervene in those
processes.[^38]

Some of the iconography around alchemy acknowledged the importance of
visual acuity for practitioners, both in a positive and negative way.
Alembics, retorts, and flasks appear prominently in early modern
representations of the alchemist in his laboratory, who often is
depicted peering into these glass vessels -- or, more pointedly,
decidedly ignoring that glassware, as if neglecting to carefully monitor
the contents within, or simply not seeing what was important about them,
is itself a sign of faulty practice. \[Figure 7: Teniers, "The Alchemist
in His Workshop"\] Even in the more straightforward satires of the
alchemist as the "pseudo-chymical drone" whom Maier despised, vision
plays a prominent role in highlighting failure and folly. *Von der
Artzney bayder Glück*, for example, the 1532 German edition of
Petrarch's *De remediis utriusque fortunae,* concludes a denunciation of
the folly of alchemy by noting that, "In the end many \[alchemists\]
lose first intellectual vision \[*augen des gemuts*\] and then the use
of their physical eyes \[*ubung die leyplichen augen*\] to boot."[^39]
The accompanying image to this passage shows the alchemist in
spectacles, his failing eyes an external, bodily manifestation of
failing intellect, destroyed by the foolish pursuit of alchemy. \[Figure
8: Petrarch, *Von der Artzney bayder Glück,* image just before p.
CXXXII\]

Maier attempts to flip this critique on its head, however. In Emblem 42,
he places spectacles on his chymist not to represent not weak, failing
eyes, but rather the power of "art" to bolster the chymist's insights
into nature. "*Experientia* will be the spectacles, with which the
things that are far away can be seen close up," Maier explains; "these
are the optical instruments invented and made by art, which come to the
aid of man's weak eyes and correct them." Just as spectacles or
telescopes extend the limited sense of sight, he proposes, so, too, must
chymists turn to "art" -- "*experimenta* with mineral matters" -- to
build up their "experiences" of nature (in the conventional Aristotelian
sense of a store of memories that allow one eventually to build up
understanding). "The more of these experiences one remembers the more
reasonable deliberation will be able to make mutual comparisons in order
to distinguish truth from untruth."[^40] In short, Maier's spectacles
represent the chymist's laboratory practice, the "*experimenta* with
mineral matters" that allow him to build up an understanding of nature
and thus to better grasp the chymical arcana concealed in nature. The
chymical eye that *Atalanta fugiens* invokes, in other words, is not
simply the sense of sight, but rather intellectual insight. The book
equips readers with spectacles of their own, as it were, by pointing
practitioners to the laboratory to carry out their own
*experimenta*.[^41]

But what about the music? Did Maier hope to cultivate a chymical ear, as
well as a chymical eye? Maier was less explicit about how singing and
hearing the music in *Atalanta fugiens* might translate into chymical
practice, but he did address music generally in his Preface to the
Reader, underscoring the importance of music, "both vocal and
instrumental," in antiquity. Greek philosophers, he noted, regarded as
ignorant anyone who "refused the lyre at feasts," highlighting the
sociability of music performance, and perhaps hinting at how his own
fugues should be sung in social settings. Maier also pointed out how
essential music was to education for Socrates, Plato (who, Maier
commented, "stated that one is not put together harmoniously who does
not rejoice in Music's harmony"), and, of course to Pythagoras, "who is
said to have used musical symphonies morning and evening to compose the
spirits of his disciples."[^42] Music, then, could promote sociability
and exemplify harmony, but it could also set the appropriate mood for
study. It was the power of music to influence the hearer's disposition
(*affectus*), that especially interested Maier, and that offers a clue
to how he might have imagined the sense of hearing to be related to the
practice of chymistry. "For Music has this peculiar power," he wrote,
"that it excites or calms the affections, according to the different
musical modes" (what we now think of as scales with their characteristic
melodies).[^43] The Phyrigian mode, for example, akin to the modern
minor scale, was "bellicose, because it incites to war and to battle,"
whereas the Ionian mode, or a modern major scale, had the opposite
effect, producing "amity" and calm. Maier's implication here was that,
just as music could set the appropriate mood for students, warriors, and
diplomats to carry out their work, so too could it prepare the chymist's
body and mind to explore nature's secrets.

In making this claim, Maier drew on a long tradition, from Orpheus to
the Renaissance magus Cornelius Agrippa that positioned music as an
important part of prayer, healing, natural magic, and the dispelling of
evil spirits.[^44] This particular use of music was rare in an
alchemical context, although it was quite prominent in the work of the
Paracelsian physician and author Heinrich Khunrath, who invitingly
placed a pile of musical instruments smack in the middle of one of the
most elaborate images associated with alchemy, his *Lab-Oratorium,*
which appeared in Khunrath's *Amphitheatrum sapientae aeternae*
1595/1609, shortly before *Atalanta fugiens.* \[Figure: Khunrath
Amphitheater image\] Peter Forshaw has explored at length the role of
music in this image, arguing that Khunrath's instruments allude to
numerical concepts of weight, number, and proportion (in this case, of
chymical materials), as well as to the harmonious balance between theory
and practice, heaven and earth, and spirit and matter.[^45] Khunrath was
also interested in the musical modes in the context of sacred music and
theurgic ritual, however, a subject that the "oratory" half of his image
explores.

Maier borrowed liberally from Khunrath in his writings,[^46] so he may
well have been responding in some way to Khunrath's complex imagery.
Just as significant, however, is the fact that Maier's melodies are not,
as they may appear, Maier's original compositions, but are, rather,
quotes of existing liturgical melodies. For the apple's *cantus firmus*
that is present in all fifty fugues, Maier used a liturgical melody, the
Kyrie *Cunctipotens genitor deus*, a Gregorian chant setting for the
Mass ordinary. Helen Joy Sleeper first identified this as the apple part
in 1938, describing the *Cunctipotens genitor deus* as "one of the most
familiar of church melodies, and one, moreover, employed by composers
from an anonymous eleventh or twelfth century writer to Frescobaldi in
the seventeenth century."[^47] But Maier had a more specific source for
using the Kyrie in this way, overlaid with a two-voice canon. As Loren
Ludwig argues in his essay for this volume \[link to LOREN\], Maier took
the first forty fugues in *Atalanta fugiens* from a collection of short,
three-part vocal pieces, or "waies," published by the English composer
John Farmer in 1591.[^48] If the canonic interaction of the three voices
purports to tells the story of the contest between Atalanta and
Hippomenes, therefore, the actual melodies they sing point to liturgical
music and suggest a Christian, rather than classical, context for
Maier's book.[^49] On one level, Maier's choice of melodies underscored
the notion of chymical arcana as a way to approach the divine. But if
music was important to Maier because it prepared the chymist's
*affectus*, then we must also understand his fugues not as a narrative
technique, or part of his elaborate game in *Atalanta fugiens*, but also
as part of the deliberate, careful training of senses and intellect,
body and mind, that he viewed as necessary to practice chymistry
properly.

**Conclusion**

I have suggested that the multimedia emblems in Maier's original edition
of *Atalanta fugiens* were, among other things, an epistemological tool
and a meditation on the relationship between the intellect and the
senses of sight and hearing in the practice of chymistry. In focusing
his readers on this issue by using format of the musical emblem book,
Maier asked them to prepare their minds and their bodies to grapple with
chymistry. Whether reading books or carrying out laboratory practices,
Maier's chymist engaged his entire body, including the intellect. Only
then could he hope to grasp the chymical arcana that God had placed in
nature to develop his intellect and lift him above the beasts.

Seventy years after Maier published *Atalanta fugiens*, however, it was
possible to imagine chymistry without this entire corporal edifice. When
Georg Heinrich Oehrling republished Maier's masterpiece in 1687, he did
so without the music at all, keeping only the images with their
associated Latin mottos and epigrams and even editing out the references
to music from Maier's preface.[^50] \[Figure 9: 1687 cover, or link to
Donna's essay\] In eliminating the music, the 1687 edition jettisoned
the most complicated and demanding elements in *Atalanta fugiens*,
namely the interplay of myth and chymistry, returning Maier's book to a
more conventional emblem format and reducing it to an illustrated
collection of alchemical dicta. In silencing the music, the 1687 also
stripped Maier's chymistry of its sacred context; the chymist might
still need his eyes and intellect, but he no longer needed sacred music
to prepare his disposition to understand nature's secrets properly. It
is tempting to say that "chymistry" was on its way to becoming
"chemistry," increasingly focused on the material engagement with nature
in the laboratory, rather than on an outmoded resonance between nature
and the divine or the remote classical past. Perhaps. But in discarding
Maier's vision of a fully embodied chymical practice, the 1687 edition
of *Atalanta fugiens* may also have unmoored chymistry (or at least the
project of the philosopher's stone) from the senses, turning it into a
primarily intellectual and literary practice, and thus also paving the
way for its abstraction the nineteenth century and absorption into "the
occult."[^51]

Figure list for Tara's essay

1.  *Atalanta*, title page

2.  Andrea Alciato, *Emblematum liber* (if not cost prohibitive). Andrea
    > Alciato, *Emblematum liber* (Augsburg: Heinrich Steyner, 28
    > February 1531, 1st edition).
    > [[http://www.emblems.arts.gla.ac.uk/alciato/books.php?id=A31a]{.underline}](http://www.emblems.arts.gla.ac.uk/alciato/books.php?id=A31a)

3.  Part II of *De Alchemia Opuscula complura veterum philosophorum\...*
    > (Frankfurt, 1550). (if not cost prohibitive).

4.  *Atalanta*, Emblem 11

5.  *Atalanta,* Emblem 25

6.  *Atalanta,* Emblem 42

7.  Can I use Teniers, the alchemist in his workshop, from the CHF?

8.  Francesco Petrarca, *Von der Artzney bayder Glück,* image just
    > before p. CXXXII*:
    > [[http://reader.digitale-sammlungen.de/de/fs1/object/display/bsb11200493\_00290.html]{.underline}](http://reader.digitale-sammlungen.de/de/fs1/object/display/bsb11200493_00290.html)*

9.  1687 edition of Atalanta (or link to Donna's essay): *Michaelis
    > Maieri \... secretioris naturae secretorum scrutinium chymicum,
    > per oculis et intellectui accurate accommodata, figuris cupro
    > appositissime incisa, ingeniosissima emblemata, hisque confines*
    > (Frankfurt: 1687):
    > [[http://www.e-rara.ch/cgj/content/titleinfo/1906527]{.underline}](http://www.e-rara.ch/cgj/content/titleinfo/1906527)

Also, audio for Fugue 42

[^1]: Michael Maier, *Atalanta fugiens, hoc est, Emblemata nova de
    secretsis naturae chymica* (Oppenheim: Johann Theodor de Bry, 1618),
    title page. I am using the copy from the Herzog August Bibliothek:
    [[http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm]{.underline}](http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm)

[^2]: Maier, "Praefatio ad lectorem," *Atalanta fugiens*, 10.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00012
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. I follow the translation here in
    Joscelyn Godwin, ed. and transl., *Atalanta Fugiens: An Edition of
    the Fugues, Emblems, and Epigrams*, Magnum Opus Hermetic
    Sourceworks, \#22 (Grand Rapids, MI: Phanes Press, 1989), 104.

[^3]: This topic is of interest to modern historians as well. For
    example, Pamela H. Smith, *The Body of the Artisan: Art and
    Experience in the Scientific Revolution* (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2004); Christopher Lawrence and Steven Shapin,
    *Science Incarnate: Historical Embodiments of Natural Knowledge*
    (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1998).

[^4]: Maier preferred the terms *chymicus* and *ars chymica* (or, more
    negatively, *pseudo-chymicus*) to *alchemist* or *alchemie*. I will
    follow his usage here, but also note that his understanding of
    *chymia* included transmutational alchemy. On Maier's usage, see H.
    M. E. de Jong, *Michael Maier's Atalanta fugiens: Sources of an
    Alchemical Book of Emblems* (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1969), 11. For more
    on the complicated issue of terminology, see William R. Newman and
    Lawrence M. Principe. \"Alchemy vs. Chemistry: The Etymological
    Origins of a Historiographic Mistake.\" *Early Science and Medicine*
    3 (1998): 32-65.

[^5]: Ovid\'s *Metamorphoses*, Bk X:560-637, tr. Anthony S. Kline:
    [[http://ovid.lib.virginia.edu/trans/Metamorph10.htm\#484521428]{.underline}](http://ovid.lib.virginia.edu/trans/Metamorph10.htm#484521428).
    Accessed 13 February 2017.

[^6]: Andrea Alciato, *Emblematum liber* (Augsburg: Heinrich Steyner, 28
    February 1531, 1st edition).
    [[http://www.emblems.arts.gla.ac.uk/alciato/books.php?id=A31a]{.underline}](http://www.emblems.arts.gla.ac.uk/alciato/books.php?id=A31a)
    Accessed 14. Feburary 2017.

[^7]: The cabinet of curiosities offers a nice parallel here. See Paula
    Findlen, *Possessing Nature: Museums, Collecting, and Scientific
    Culture In Early Modern Italy* (Berkeley: University of California
    Press, 1994). On play and games in early modern culture, see Paula
    Findlen, \"Jokes of Nature and Jokes of Knowledge: The Playfulness
    of Scientific Discourse in Early Modern Europe.\" *Renaissance
    Quarterly* 43, no. 2 (1990): 292-331. doi:10.2307/2862366; Allison
    Levy, ed., *Playthings in Early Modernity: Party Games, Word Games,
    Mind Games* (Kalamazoo: Medieval Institute Publications, Western
    Michigan University, 2017); Katelijne Schiltz and Bonnie J.
    Blackburn, *Music and Riddle Culture in the Renaissance* (New York :
    Cambridge University Press, 2015)

[^8]: For a basic introduction to the genre of the emblem book, see
    Peter M. Daly, "Emblems: An Introduction," in *Companion to Emblem
    Studies*, ed. Daly, 1-24 (New York: AMS Press, 2008) and John
    Manning, *The Emblem* (London: Reaktion Books, 2003; repr. ed.). On
    the *Bildgedicht* genre and the Sol-Luna sequence in the *Rosarium
    philosophorum*, see Joachim Telle, *Sol und Luna: Literar- und
    Alchemiegeschichtliche Studien zu einem altdeutschen Bildgedicht*
    (Hürtgenwald: Pressler, 1980); Barbara Obrist, *Les débuts de
    l\'imagerie alchimique (14e-15e siècles*) (Paris: Le Sycomore,
    1982); Didier Kahn, "Alchemical Poetry in Medieval and Early Modern
    Europe: A Preliminary Survey and Synthesis. Part I --- Preliminary
    Survey," *Ambix*, 57:3, 261-63, DOI:
    10.1179/174582310X12849808295788

[^9]: Maier, *Atalanta* fugiens, 53.
    [[http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00055]{.underline}](http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00055)
    Accessed 14. February, 2017

[^10]: De Jong identified two sources for this quote, both in the second
    volume of the prominent collection of alchemical texts, *Auriferae
    Artis, quam Chemiam vocant* (Basel: Petrus Perna, 1572). "Dealbate
    Latonem et libros rumpite, ne corda corrumpantur," Morienus, *De
    Transmutatione Metallorum*, in *Auriferae Artis* II, 43-44, and
    "Dealbate Latonem et libros rumpite, ne corda vestre corrumpantur,"
    *Rosarium philosophorum*, in *Auriferae Artis* II, 305. See de Jong,
    115.

[^11]: See de Jong, 115-119 for a full discussion of this reference.

[^12]: "Hanc alii tradunt cum luna lumina solis/ Mixta, nigrae cui sint
    in facie maculae." Although in this phrasing it is the mixture that
    is flecked with dark spots, the following sentence, as well as the
    German translation and discourse, make it clear that the spots are
    on Latona's face, not her children. The analogy, in other words,
    breaks down a bit.
    [[http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00055]{.underline}](http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00055)
    Accessed 14. February, 2017.

[^13]: [[http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00055]{.underline}](http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00055)
    Accessed 14. February, 2017.

[^14]: In fact, despite the fact that Maier followed convention in
    placing a "letter to the reader" at the front of his book, it makes
    more sense to think about "users," a term that leaves open the
    question of which faculties someone might have deployed to engage
    with the book.

[^15]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta fugiens,* 8.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00010
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin's translation, 102.

[^16]: Pamela Smith, *The Body of the Artisan.*

[^17]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta fugiens,* 8.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00010
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin's translation, 102.

[^18]: On "dispersion" as a rhetorical technique for concealment, see
    William R. Newman, \"Alchemical Symbolism and Concealment: The
    Chemical House of Libavius,\" in *The Architecture of Science*,
    edited by Peter Galison and Emily Thompson (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
    Press, 1999), 71. On Decknamen and alchemy, see William R. Newman,
    "'Decknamen' or Pseudochemical Language"? Eirenaeus Philalethes and
    Carl Jung,\" *Revue d\'Histoire des Sciences et de leurs
    Applications* 49 (1996): 159-88.

[^19]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta fugiens,* 9.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00011
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin's translation, 102.

[^20]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta fugiens,* 9.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00011
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin's translation, 102.

[^21]: Maier, "Epigramma Authorius," *Atalanta fugiens*.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00004
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin's translation.

[^22]: On the contested status of alchemy or chymistry in this period,
    see Bruce T. Moran, *Andreas Libavius and the Transformation of
    Alchemy: Separating Chemical Cultures with Polemical Fire* (Sagamore
    Beach, MA: Science History Publications/Watson Pub. International,
    2007) and Tara Nummedal, *Alchemy and Authority in the Holy Roman
    Empire* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007).

[^23]: For an overview, see Katharine Park, "The Organic Soul," in C. B.
    Schmitt, Quentin Skinner, Eckhard Kessler, and Jill Kraye eds., *The
    Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1990), 465-7.

[^24]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta* fugiens, 6.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00008
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin transl, 101.

[^25]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta* fugiens, 6.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00008
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin transl, 101.

[^26]: See William S. Eamon, *Science and the Secrets of Nature*
    (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994); Elaine Yuen Tien
    Leong and Alisha Michelle Rankin, *Secrets and Knowledge in Medicine
    and Science, 1500 -- 1800* (Farnham: Ashgate, 2011).

[^27]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta* fugiens, 6.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00008
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin transl, 101. Asses to the lyre,
    or incompetent people, a proverb which circulated widely in the
    Renaissance. See, for example, Erasmus, "An Ass to the Lyre," Adages
    I iv 35.

[^28]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta* fugiens, 6-7.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00008
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin transl, 101.

[^29]: Maier, "Praefatio ad Lectorem," *Atalanta* fugiens, 7.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00008
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. Godwin transl, 101.

[^30]: Maier, *Atalanta* fugiens, 54.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00056
    Accessed 14. February, 2017. De Jong transl, discourse 11.

[^31]: Although in this phrasing it is the mixture that is flecked with
    dark spots, the following sentence, as well as the German
    translation and discourse, make it clear that the spots are on
    Latona's face, not her children. The analogy, in other words, breaks
    down a bit. See deJong's commentary, which notes Maier's reference
    to the Clangor bucinae, which identifies Laton as a yellow mixture
    of silver and gold.

[^32]: Maier, *Atalanta* fugiens, 176-9.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00178
    Accessed 14. February, 2017.

[^33]: Maier, *Atalanta* fugiens, 178.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00180
    Accessed 14. February, 2017 Transl. from de Jong.

[^34]: Ibid.

[^35]: Maier, *Atalanta* fugiens, 178.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00180
    Accessed 14. February, 2017 Transl. from de Jong.

[^36]: I follow the analysis of the music in Fugue 42 from Streich, 56.

[^37]: Michael Stolberg, *Uroscopy in Early Modern Europe* (Abingdon,
    Oxon.: Routledge, 2016).

[^38]: Tara Nummedal, "Watching: Andreas Orthelius's Alchemical Eye," in
    progress.

[^39]: Conrad H. Rawski, ed., *Remedies for Fortune Fair and Foul: A
    Modern English Translation of De remediis utriusque fortune, with a
    Commentary* (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991), I:
    299-301.

[^40]: Maier, *Atalanta* fugiens, 178.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00181
    Accessed 14. February, 2017 Transl. from de Jong.

[^41]:  Several of the emblems, in fact, describe chymical processes
    that a knowledgeable reader could translate into practice and thus
    "see farther" into nature's secrets. For example, emblems 9, 11, and
    24.

[^42]: Maier, *Atalanta* fugiens, 178.
    http://diglib.hab.de/drucke/196-quod-1s/start.htm?image=00009
    Accessed 14. February, 2017 Transl. from Godwin.

[^43]: Ibid, Godwin 102

[^44]: Gary Tomlinson, *Music in Renaissance Magic: Toward a
    Historiography of Others* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1993). Music was also considered to be part of mathematics, and thus
    the exploration of nature in a different way. See Penelope Gouk,
    *Music, Science, and Natural Magic in Seventeenth-Century England*
    (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1999). See also D. P. Walker, ‬

[^45]: Forshaw, "*Oratorium---Auditorium---Laboratorium*: Early Modern
    Improvisations on Cabala, Music, and Alchemy," *ARIES* 10.2 (2010),
    189.

[^46]: For example Maier lifted many of the "tricks" he attributed to
    "pseudo-chymists" in his *Examen fucorum pseudo-chymicorum* from
    Khunrath's 1597 "Treuhertzige Warnungs-Vermahnung," in *Von
    hylealishcen das ist pri-materialischen Catholischen oder
    allgemeinen natürlichen Chaos* (Magdeburg, 1597). Tara Nummedal,
    *Alchemy and Authority in the Holy Roman Empire* (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2007), 171.

[^47]: Helen Joy Sleeper, "The Alchemical Fugues in Count Michael
    Maier's Atalanta Fugiens," *Journal of Chemical* Education, Vol. 15,
    No. 9 (September 1938), 413. Sleeper's discovery long went
    unacknowledged, however. For its reception in the historiography on
    *Atalanta fugiens*, see Paul P. Raasveld, "Michael Maiers *Atalanta
    fugiens* (1617) und das Kompositionsmodell in Johannes Lippius's
    *Sunopsis musicae novae* (1612), in *From Ciconia to Sweelinck:
    donum natalicium Willem Elders*, edited by Albert Clement and Eric
    Jas (Amsterdam and Atlanta: Rodopi, 1994), 359, fn. 9.

[^48]: John Farmer, *Diuers & sundry waies of two parts in one, to the
    number of fortie, vppon one plainsong* (London: T. Este, the assigne
    of W. Byrd, sould at the authors house, 1591).

[^49]: Essay in progress, but will eventually be linked here.

[^50]: *Michaelis Maieri \... secretioris naturae secretorum scrutinium
    chymicum, per oculis et intellectui accurate accommodata, figuris
    cupro appositissime incisa, ingeniosissima emblemata, hisque
    confines* (Frankfurt: 1687). The German disappeared too, but since
    this was repeated in the Latin, it is less significant. Link here
    also to Donna Bilak's essay in this volume on this later edition.

[^51]: For this trajectory, see Lawrence M. Principe and William R.
    Newman, \"Some Problems with the Historiography of Alchemy,\" in
    *Secrets of Nature: Astrology and Alchemy in Early Modern Europe*,
    ed. Newman and Anthony Grafton (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2001),
    385-431.
